[Music]
welcome to topcast and to the
long-awaited or at least often mentioned
episode 100. this here is finally my
interview with david in full unabridged
form it contains all my questions for
david and multiple more questions this
is basically an audio only podcast there
are no visuals today my friend recently
told me that he doesn't like it when i
say to audio only listeners that the
youtube version is sometimes better
because i put lots of pretty visuals in
it he says that he listens while he's
out walking or jogging and can't look at
a screen well today adam you don't need
to worry about that and to all the other
atoms out there who i think outnumber
the youtube viewers by about a ten to
one ratio i'll keep in mind moving
forward as we say that so many of you
only listen and don't watch screens
perhaps it would be more fair if it was
a ten to one ratio of audio only two
visually important podcasts from now on
we'll see so this episode is i have to
say up front rather an astonishing
personal accomplishment for me everyone
has people they admire growing up among
my peer group like any group of school
kids i guess the common thing was
looking up to famous sports stars or
music idols or movie stars i know i
idolized arnold schwarzenegger this was
back in his early days of doing movies
not his more recent political stuff back
then he was quite the optimist and his
personal story was easily as heroic as
any of his on-screen characters
nevertheless i was never under any
illusions i'd ever get to meet arnold
much less have a conversation with him i
lived in australia in the southwestern
suburbs of sydney it's not the place to
come across movie stars sports
celebrities singers or accomplished
scientists for the most part but happily
for me some intellectual heroes of mine
were accessible by pure chance and
circumstance in some cases i've
mentioned before on this podcast that
professor paul davies author of the mind
of god and many other books produced a
couple of physics documentary series
here in australia called the big
questions he also used to write articles
for local news outlets and he appeared
on tv here rather regularly when he did
live here in australia for a time i read
listened to and watched anything and
everything professor dave he's ever put
out there that i could find and early on
he was the guy my scientific hero so to
speak he seemed to know everything for
some reason so it was an amazing stroke
of luck when one day he just happened to
turn up unannounced at an event i was
helping to host at university i got his
autograph i actually got his autograph
on my philosophy uni notes as it turned
out not one of his books the name of the
subject in which the uni notes were
compiled was called god life the
universe and everything which was right
up his alley and the lecture notes
actually had excerpts from one of his
books that i proudly showed him i was
literally studying his stuff at the time
so i ended up having a brief
conversation with paul davies winner of
the templeton prize and i kind of
thought that in my early 20s this was a
pretty good accomplishment for an
undergrad physics student still living
with their parents in an exceedingly
typical home on a typical street in a
typical suburb one among hundreds in
greater sydney australia i guess to put
it in perspective it would have been
rather like an aspiring pop singer just
happening to bump into michael jackson
or madonna or for younger listeners
justin bieber so that was the late 90s
by which time i'd already read the
fabric of reality by david deutsch
multiple times and the remarkable thing
about having read that book was that i
just had to talk about it with someone i
think many people who read the book end
up feeling that way it's kind of unique
in that respect it doesn't happen often
as much as i loved paul davies books i
never really felt a need to discuss them
with groups of people but david's book
was different but sadly there was no one
to really talk to about it at university
the people around me even in my physics
lectures just didn't seem to get the
significance of it well of course they
hadn't read it to begin with at the same
time i was reformulating my own thoughts
from decades of schooling and some years
of tertiary education in light of what
the fabric of reality was saying about
the nature of knowledge and so on i was
converted by that book to the many
worlds interpretation of quantum theory
in other words realism i was converted
to populion epistemology in other words
i had some insight into what knowledge
actually was and how it was created but
whenever i mentioned either of those
things let's say many worlds to a
physics tutor or professor or papa to a
philosophy tutor or professor i barely
ever got more than a shrug or maybe a
hint that i should go and read about
bohmian mechanics or maybe take more
seriously what feynman had to say about
understanding quantum theory or in the
case of papa to look more deeply into
the vienna circle and what wittgenstein
had to say on the matters that papa was
writing about in other words in both
cases there were not many sympathetic
ears now i cannot remember exactly how
it happened and this is in the era
before google but some search engine or
other allowed me to eventually find
myself online in the late 90s and the
early 2000s able to now and again
fire a question to david deutsch himself
via email about the fabric of reality i
was astonished that he was the guy the
inventor of quantum computation that
seemingly no one much knew about but
seemed to know a heck of a lot more and
make considerably more sense than anyone
else i'd ever encountered in academia or
intellectual circles i was one of the
privileged few in retrospect who knew a
second book was on the way though we
never knew what it would be called nor
when it would arrive but the
anticipation grew over the decade until
finally it was published i think perhaps
only star wars fans waiting for the next
canonic film to drop know exactly that
same feeling well even in that case they
don't really films are a transient thing
but a book like the beginning of
infinity is kind of bottomless in a way
that no other consumable content quite
is so i've been a fan of david deutsch
for decades now so it still blows my
mind that i could be in a position to
actually just have a chat with him as we
do here albeit from the other side of
the world and on that me being far
closer to antarctica than most of the
population of the planet and most people
who are listening to this will be far
closer to the arctic the finiteness of
the speed of light did catch david and i
out on more than one occasion making
this episode in some places a little bit
disjointed so editing was required for
listenability in some places but
hopefully i've done a good enough job
that you don't notice i'm not a polished
interviewer of course this seemed to be
half conversation half interview and i
have learned now on putting this
together to not speak over the person
i'm talking to or try to fill pauses
with noises of agreement
i have learned those lessons now but i
did not know them beforehand which means
there are some places where i do seem to
forget i am being recorded
as this is episode 100 a sort of
announcement is in order that being that
topcast will continue to go from
strength to strength in a space of
podcasts that seems to expand
continuously but i think there is a nice
little niche here that needs to be
filled so i'll continue doing what i do
but with more energy thanks to the
support of patreons and especially of
course to navarre ravikant whose own
worldview and wisdom aligns so closely
with the optimism view of progress and
wealth of david deutsch and what i am
trying to promote here so i'll continue
doing what i do which is long form
podcasts especially on deutsches the
fabric of reality my letters the science
of canon can't and pinker's rationality
for now but i'll also be broadening out
and refining things making lots more
standalone episodes and really
tightening things up on some of the
ideas we like to talk about here and
making far more brief podcasts as well
and maybe now and again i'll do the odd
recorded conversation once in a while so
look forward to that in the coming weeks
and months and years if you're a fan now
this introduction is already longer than
i hoped for but i actually haven't done
a job of introduction which i should do
in an episode like this i need to
introduce my guests but of course david
needs no introduction especially if
you're listening to this as a subscriber
of topcast because topcast is largely a
podcast devoted to the work and
worldview of david deutsch the inventor
of the theory of quantum computation
author of the first quantum algorithm
intellectual successor to the
epistemology and philosophy of karl
popper author of the fabric of reality
and the beginning of infinity creator of
constructor theory david is a fellow of
the royal society winner of the direct
prize in 1998 for quote
pioneering work in quantum computation
leading to the concept of a quantum
computer and for contributing to the
understanding of how such devices might
be constructed from quantum gates in
quantum networks and he was also the
co-winner of the dirac medal in 2017 for
quote building the foundations of
quantum information science his books
have won prizes and he has won other
prizes as well go to his website and the
about me section to find out more about
all that but as i record this i've just
learned that this week the final week of
november 2021 david has won the isaac
newton medal from the institute of
physics in the united kingdom for quote
founding the discipline named quantum
computation and establishing quantum
computations fundamental idea now known
as the qubit or quantum bit end quote he
has now also been elected a fellow of
that institute of physics prizes
accolades and accomplishments aside the
impact of david deutsch on the world is
yet to be fully realized but it is going
to become perhaps something like that of
an einstein or a newton or a darwin in
my opinion which is why we're so lucky
to be able to interrogate him once in a
while once the first fully functional
universal quantum computer is built the
landscape of the world will change when
the average person understands and
appreciates that its function can only
be explained by recourse 2a multiverse
the intellectual world will change when
people look back in retrospect and
realize he was right all along in what
he said about quantum computation and
therefore about explanations and hence
papa the world will be changed we can
only hope that that change goes deeper
still into how the education of young
people is handled how we deal with
problems both known and unknown why
progress optimism and wealth need to
motivate us all individually and as a
civilization the world will be changed
and we will see that what i've just said
about putting david alongside the
biggest names in science and philosophy
is neither hyperbole or hubris it is a
serious claim i just wish it would all
happen far sooner but that's enough of
an introduction i'll have a few brief
remarks at the end of this but for now
i present to you my interview my
discussion my conversation with david
deutsch
okay well thanks very much anyway for
doing this david it's a it's a real
honor to
talk to you and be able to record this
conversation and this book you know that
i've spent you know the last few years
exploring now is unlike just about any
other to my mind and i've said this a
few times that it's unlike other popular
science books because it's not really a
popular science book one thing that it
contains within it that is different to
other science books it's what i might
say are sort of discoveries in
philosophy and physics or at the very
least
new ways of refining and explaining
material you've put out there elsewhere
in other forms perhaps the first time
this seems to crop up actually is in
chapter one the reach of explanations
and there we get the concept of good
explanations good explanations being
actual explanations that account for
what is out there in the world and how
it works that are hard to vary
these hard to vary explanations now i'm
convinced and most people who hear about
it become convinced over time but i
think there's a lot of people who think
well science isn't it just about
testable theories why isn't testable
theories enough so there was a lot about
explanations even in my first book yes
and some
some uh careful readers
pointed out
that uh i never actually explained what
an explanation is in the fabric of
reality in in fact i i seem to have
taken a bit of a cop-out path by saying
just just saying about explanations that
there isn't any closed list of
attributes that an explanation must have
and uh that's because it seemed to me
that and i think it does seem to many
people
that the difference between an
explanation and a prediction is obvious
um
but to most people it was quite
opaque
so i thought about it and this this is
indeed one of the few things that i will
acknowledge is kind of a
bit of an innovation in
the beginning of infinity
uh i thought about what what exactly
makes the difference
and i thought of some examples
such as the explanation of the seasons
as opposed to predicting them and then i
i think that the example that i like
best although again not everyone does
is the example of the the conjurer
yes where
where you go in and
you you go in to see this conjuring
performance
and you see
some cups and balls and the conjurer
puts the the
the ball under the cup and after a while
you begin to predict that
the cup where he puts the ball under is
not going to be the one where it ends up
but that doesn't mean you can explain
what's going on in the trick yeah so
yeah exactly so you you can predict
quite confidently that the ball isn't
there and there you are it's vindicated
he uh but that's not what you mean by
how is the trick done what what you what
you mean is
what has happened to bring about the
thing you saw
and so you're not asking for an account
of the thing you saw even a perfect
prediction of the thing you saw you're
asking about the thing you didn't see
yes yes and this comes up so often in
all throughout the book really and i
think it's a subtle point
easily missed and of course the other
example that you use and that you often
go to is this idea of dinosaurs the one
thing that you actually can't observe is
indeed the one thing that you're
invoking as actually existing and
causing the phenomena that you do
observe quite and i think
and in all these cases that unobserved
thing is the thing that you're really
interested in it's it's it's the only
reason you're interested in any kind of
prediction at all yes and now this
concept of then hard to vary where all
the parts of the explanation have some
functional role and this is really what
makes the explanation a good explanation
as opposed to
any arbitrary account that could be
easily varied mythological accounts and
so on magical accounts
did that come to you did you have that
in mind during the fabric of reality
writing it then or did it only come
later in light of people saying you know
can you sharpen up what you mean by
explanation
it's the latter i i like i said
while i was writing fabric of reality i
kind of thought that these were
rather foolishly i thought these were
words that had an uncontroversial
meaning
and uh i it didn't occur to me that that
that most people
would not have this meaning in mind
although many people did
so
in that sense it wasn't something i
invented
it was something that i
realized needs to have to be elaborated
to be written down more clearly and and
then i started to think about well
things that are explanations and things
that aren't explanations
and uh like the ancient myths and so on
and and then i thought with the with the
conjurer um there are circumstances
where the conjurer did it is the
explanation that the person wants yes
you can you can imagine a person who
believes in magic
and is is sort of slowly coming out of
that state of mind like like james
randy's um uh family
uh when
his story when he was a teenager and
when he first exposed a fake
psychic
and and was horrified to find that most
of the people in the audience didn't
want to know the truth yeah right yeah
uh that happened more than once there
was a famous i don't know if you know
the famous story that he was on
australian television he did the same to
the spoon bender yuri gela
on one of our daytime lunchtime talkback
television shows and the audience was
very upset with him and indeed the host
was as well and stormed off the set and
did the same thing to randy
wow
right so there there you have it i mean
that that anger
would happen
i suppose whether or not he revealed how
he did it
it was the fact that he he was revealing
that he did do it
that was the thing that angered them and
that that was the relevant explanation
in context so that's why i have to say
um
it's an explanation is hard to vary
while still solving the problem that it
purports to solve yes um
which might be different for different
people as well in the same situation
okay so you mentioned that that piece of
sort of prosaic terminology explanation
that
we all use but i think that you've uh
put a spin on it that is is is quite
helpful but turning to another word a
word that you in fact don't use and it
brings me to chapter two and that's
called don't worry i'm not going to go
through every single chapter
chronologically but then just a few of
them
but chapter two is titled closer to
reality but karl popper had this term
verisilimitude which means something
like closer to truth and it seems to me
you've deliberately avoided that word
but why is it because it contains a
misconception it's misleading or it's a
needless neologism what would be the
reason to avoid such a word i think all
of those things and i think even even
pop i don't know the history of this
very well but i think even popper went
off it papa in general was very into
logic
uh this is i think partly a sign of the
times that that uh the the people who
were uh doing the prevailing philosophy
of science at the time and positivism
and logical positivism many of them were
logicians and mathematical logicians
even poppa wanted a
papa originally uh didn't want to even
to mention truth at all and then he got
converted by it by tarsky and he tells a
story uh
about how they were sitting on a park
bench in vienna and tarski explained the
correspondence theory of truth to him
and he realized that this is this is uh
in fact a useful concept after all
but
i wonder what logic of scientific
discovery would have looked like if he
had in fact written the whole of it
without ever mentioning truth uh i think
it would have been
worse in some ways in that it's uh it's
difficult to make the case for realism
if you don't have a concept of truth
and popper was very keen to formulate a
realistic
philosophy of science but on the other
hand when you do introduce truth and
especially very similitude
then the idea is that somehow we can
utter truth
or at least we can utter something
that's 90 true or something like that
and we'd have it there by a method of
measuring that 90 percent i i think very
similitude was was not intended to be
something you could measure right but uh
it if if you can't measure it then its
only use is a sort of philosophical
regulating principle and uh i think
knowledge and problems are much better
concepts probably papa's
fundamental concept the way it
turned out when when after all these
experiments with different uh conceptual
frameworks or whatever were is the idea
of a problem because that that comes up
not only in his philosophy of science
but in his political philosophy as well
and uh more generally uh
he he
he generalizes it to
um
even
the problem situation of a gene
i'm not sure even i would go that far
but uh
it it's it's a very unifying concept and
uh on the other hand i don't think very
similitude is useful at all and
as i said even truth one has to be very
careful to to use the concept of truth
only as a property of abstractions
uh never as uh something you can
actually measure or or no um
have a direct access to
so therefore would you avoid even saying
that
scientific explanations or indeed
explanations in any domain that we
happen to be interested in would even be
approximately true because that would
also entail some kind of quantitative
claim about how close we are or can we
still use that word can we still say
yeah it's approximately true or it's a
it's uh there's some degree of accuracy
in this claim about that i think we can
use it because again depending on on the
problem situation if one is speaking
informally
then one can use
imprecise terminology i just caught
myself just a moment ago saying
probably you know i'm generally opposed
to the whole concept of probability i
think it's a scam
yes um but but that doesn't mean that in
in everyday life uh we don't know what
we mean when we're saying
some papa was pro probably meant
so-and-so
i don't mean that there was a stochastic
process where he
where he he could have meant something
else with with the probability 0.15
yeah i often find myself uh catching
myself precisely the same way that you
said uh generally it kind of has left my
vocabulary in just in day-to-day life
using the word probably but
at the same time i don't um you know
chastise myself too much because in
order to communicate normally you know
people are going to use this word they
understand i think
um yes
there is no such thing as a perfectly
precise language yes so we we want to
use uh terms and and ways of
understanding things that are suitable
to the problem that that would bring me
to uh my next question um describing
people for example as chemical scum
might be a very loose way of
understanding what people are but
hawking did it and you have a an
excellent refutation of this claim that
stephen hawking did make which seems to
be the reasonably
scientific way of understanding our
place in the universe he said that we
are just a chemical scum on the surface
of a typical planet orbiting a typical
star and so on but you say this place is
not typical is it in in what sense isn't
it typical i think the the the
description of humans as a chemical scum
on earth is
not accurate in the problem situation in
which hawking used that term it's
we we are
certainly made of chemicals but
so is the rest of the earth and so so is
all other so is all other matter in the
universe
so to single us out
as
a scum
in in these
uh if you're going to um take these
terms in the context of trying to
describe something purely in terms in
reductionist terms of their constituents
then it is simply false
to add a pejorative term that pejorative
term comes from a different problem
situation and
a different vocabulary is needed
it would be enough to say
we are chemicals like everything else in
the universe
and then you see that it would be silly
to call the earth a chemical scum or the
sun or the solar system or the milky way
galaxy
as as a chemical scum though in the
sense in which we are it is too
so we are a a special a very special
kind of chemical but then
would that entail that
the earth is special by virtue of the
fact that it is uniquely suited to
ensuring that this set of chemicals
called us is able to survive off into
some future that we are only sustained
by the existence of this planet and will
only continue to be sustained by this
planet so therefore we better look after
the environment or else
we're going to go extinct yeah so you're
putting that in in a in in a
deliberately exaggerated way that makes
it much more wrong
you could have said that with one tenth
the emphasis and it would still be wrong
um now it's true that the earth is is
that living things can exist on earth
only by virtue of the fact that the
earth
provides
by astronomical standards a very unusual
set of circumstances which if if they
were to vary by astronomical standards
by only a few percent
then
without a lot of technology we would die
and living things in general would die
without technological help but that
doesn't at all mean that the earth is
adapted to human existence
or even to life but especially to human
existence
very accurately it it uh it'd be more
true to say that the earth is barely
suitable for life
it it
provides
a relatively stable temperature
and
sunlight and
living things manage to
use that even though it's not very
conveniently provided and that that
took it hundreds of millions of years to
work out and
the
rest was provided by life itself
and most of the rest as far as humans go
was provided by humans
um there are very very few places on
earth
that humans can live
comfortably
without technology that is without
ideas provided by them and not provided
by the earth
so i don't know maybe some south sea
islands
with suitable
coconuts or whatever they have there
and even that
would be a trap because we are so
constituted
that if we did live in such an
environment for some generations our
numbers would increase
uh to the point when we will live it
where we were living in misery again
so
the the earth is we're living on earth
what has been provided is
really just the bare necessities for us
to live somewhere originally the great
lift rift valley or something and the
rest has to be provided by us yes so the
earth is not adapted
to life but life can
adapt itself to the earth but the only
thing that is going to survive in the
long run in terms of regular life not
intelligent life like ourselves are the
genes the genes are going to want to try
and make themselves survive and the
animals won't care or the other species
don't have this concept of caring into
the infinite future about their own
survival however
we do so we want to
adapt ourselves
to the earth in some way
or if not the earth then something far
larger
we want to adapt ourselves to the
universe in which we find ourselves and
the one thing that enables us to do that
is of course
solving our problems continually to
create the knowledge in order to enable
us to do so
and you have the great dichotomy of
saying problems are inevitable but
problems are soluble and here i have
heard over the years people push back
against this especially the second part
that problems are soluble for example
they argue we can't know everything and
they will invoke that it's provably the
case that given girdle's result there
are true statements we cannot prove are
true
so there is some and there are some
mathematics it's not decidable so some
problems are not soluble isn't isn't
that correct what's the what's the
argument against that line of reasoning
i
i think that the
this line of reasoning
is reaching for
a
standard of knowing that is impossible
for anything it's it's not possible to
know even provable things
by the standard that they're asking to
know unprovable things
when we say that something is provable
we mean that it's provable from
certain axioms and
girdle's theorem is about provability
which means provability from axioms now
if you if you have an undecidable
statement in some formal system and if
it was true you could always add that as
another axiom and then it would be
provable
so you might ask yeah but but how do we
know that that statement you're adding
is true
if we can't prove it well unfortunately
that objection applies to any set of
axioms and it applies to the original
set of axioms as well and uh this is
this is uh
a mistake that has been made by many
mathematicians even after godel i think
it was made by
virtually all mathematicians before
godel
but even after uh mathematicians tend to
think that there is a
class of axioms that that don't need
proof or something that that they are
self-proving or self self-evident or
they come from mathematical intuition
which is infallible or something like
that
but in fact the the axioms the rules of
inference in logic that for example if
the proposition a and b
is true
then it is necessarily the case that b
is also true now it seems self-evident
but uh it is not provable so uh what are
you going to do
are you going to say that this is a
problem that is insoluble and therefore
it's not true that problems are soluble
no people don't don't bother saying it
with
with axioms because they have this
misconception that axioms are somehow
enshrined by god or something and we can
know for sure that they are true yes but
that's not what knowledge is about we
are trying to solve problems we're not
trying to establish truths and
uh girdles
theorem is not about establishing truth
either it's about deriving things from
other things yes yes and these some one
uh
line of discussion i often pursue
here and correct me if i'm wrong but
this vast class of undecidable or
unprovable statements which
must vastly outnumber the number that
are provable statements
they're
in a sense uninteresting because that's
not what the claims of science physics
for example consist of and so they don't
have and again i would appeal to your
better knowledge on this they don't have
any they can't possibly have any
effects on
our world they're not going to help us
to solve problems as we would say we
know they exist but beyond that what
what are they interesting in any way um
well they're certainly interesting
because mathematics is interesting and
yes and
we're interested in abstractions as well
as in physical problems um and the the
reason that that uh
it seems implausible at the moment that
that um undecidable propositions
might be relevant to some practical
problem like how to how to feed the
world or how to uh eliminate viruses and
and so on is that uh the undecidable
propositions are all about
infinite sets infinite sets of things
like the the set of all numbers and uh
that kind of thing and
uh
physics as we currently conceive of it
the the infinite sets that appear in
physics are very tame and don't have
these problems in them but that's that's
like you know i can conceive that that
maybe one day somebody invents a
different physical theory
where
the the
undecidability of certain propositions
about the real numbers
would tell you something about whether
well about how to do and how not to do
certain things that you want
there i think roger penrose once pointed
out that certain theories of quantum
gravity do depend on
touring undecidable propositions
basically it's it's like you have if
you're working out a finement diagram to
work out how what the probability is
that a certain gravitational wave will
interact with another gravitational wave
you know this is
very far from ordinary experience
then if you want to work that out
accurately you have to do a sum you have
to sum the amplitudes for for all
possible processes over all geometries
and for all possible topologies
and to enumerate all possible topologies
in the relevant sense i mean i'm not a
mathematician i don't know about this
stuff but but apparently that's that's
an undecidable task and therefore you
couldn't work out uh this probability
amplitude for the gravitational wave
doing something or other
because you would have to
have a mathematical expression for all
topologies in a in a given sense so
that's an example of how in principle
laws of physics might have undecidable
consequences
yes and therefore that the undecidable
consequences are actually interesting
well it would be physically interesting
yes it you know in principle something
that you wanted to do might depend on
working out this thing
but i i i don't see any particular
reason for making a just as long as we
have the necessities of life and comfort
i don't see any reason for making a
distinction between problems in
engineering and in physics and in pure
mathematics i mean they're they're all
problems they're all conflicts between
theories that that interest people
people want to know what the resolution
is one thing i say in in the book about
pure mathematical problems
is that
sometimes
discovering that something is
undecidable is the solution to the
problem in in the sense that it's the
pro it's what you wanted to know
because you you have in mind some some
prima facie argument that it that a
certain proposition is true and another
prime prima facie argument that it that
it's um
false
and then you discover that it's actually
undecidable and that explains why you
could have these two
conflicting intuitions about it and then
you can go and criticize your intuitions
in other ways because you know that
you're not going to be able to resolve
it by proving one of them true
or false
now you mentioned in that answer there
the concept of abstractions and you
actually invoked abstractions in in
talking about it of course pure
mathematics is about abstractions and i
don't know what might be the most
controversial chapter in the book but i
think among intellectual types to at
least some extent it would be chapter
five if it's not going to be the why
flowers are beautiful chapter it's going
to be the one that claims there is a
reality to abstractions because to some
people this seems weirdly enough you
know not to me i think not most people
listening to this but it can sound like
an appeal to the supernatural or some
sort of woo because some people are
physicalists they think that everything
just has to come down to the behavior of
atoms but i wanted to ask you if you
distinguish between kinds of
abstractions rather than defending the
thesis that abstractions are real
i know this is not necessarily a
well-defined area but for example
something like numbers they're
abstractions are they different in kind
to let's say knowledge because after all
there may be infinitely well there are
infinitely many prime numbers and not
all of those prime numbers ever need to
be instantiated in a physical substrate
anywhere nevertheless they still exist
but knowledge to be knowledge has to be
extension instantiated in a physical
substrate it's also abstract
but
well i might pull the breaks there can
you explain if there are these different
species of abstractions and if so how do
we understand the differences in their
existence
yes
there are different species of
abstractions i mean maybe it's better to
say there there there is a
classification of abstractions and some
classifications are quite useful
uh because uh abstractions within the
same category of classification have
similar properties and can be understood
with similar explanations or the same
explanation but then with the different
problem situations you might want to
classify things differently
like you know just like in biology we
may wish to
sometimes we want to classify things as
mammals and birds and reptiles and so on
and on other occasions we may want to
classify them as aquatic creatures and
terrestrial creatures and aerial
creatures and so on so classifications
are
useful relative to the problems that
they are that you want to talk about and
it's the same with abstractions it's
it's definitely true that some
abstractions as you say like knowledge
and information more generally don't
exist unless they're instantiated
so they have to have this extra element
of being instantiated but that that's
also true of there are there are more
classifications than that even even
among pure abstractions there there are
abstractions that well it's it seems to
be important in mathematics to like i
said to
distinguish between abstractions that
involve infinite sets
and abstractions that don't
and then
the whole idea of a set is is not
universally applicable so the set of all
sets it famously turned out even before
godel it turned out that this
from russell that it it turned out that
the
setable sets isn't a set
um so you then you have to invoke a
class it's just a class of things for
the set of all sets that don't contain
itself so there's that's right so that
there's
but it doesn't help because there's it
doesn't help with everything because uh
there's no such thing as the class of
all classes either right so
uh
yes there are different kinds of things
and another thing which which i think is
still slightly mysterious is what kind
of an abstraction the laws of physics
are some people think precisely by
arguments such as such as you've
mentioned that there really are no laws
of physics all there are are physical
events and physical processes and laws
are just a kind way of summarizing
physical events and processes they just
are so because
i see that that looking out of the
window i can see that the sky is
cloudless at the moment that is some
kind of emergent consequence of the laws
of physics but
it if it's true
then um
people who deny that there are laws of
physics will say well that's just a fact
about the universe and you could you
could summarize it and say that on three
of the days of this week the sky was
clear and that's not a law of nature so
why should we
why why should there be anything special
about
the statement that
nothing can exceed the speed of light
well it's because the statement that
nothing
exceeds the speed of light is not just a
prediction
it is an explanation it's an explanation
of how the universe is
that the universe is a
four-dimensional
pseudo-riemannian manifold
with a metric and and and so on and so
on and the fact that the speed of light
is finite
emerges from that
explanation
and you could write down
all the
predictions that follow from that
uh in a sort of infinitely long list of
things like like this dog can't run
faster than light and this car can't
travel faster than light and once you've
made that
infinitely long list or maybe just very
long very very long list you would have
written down everything that can be
deduced about
what happens in nature
but you wouldn't have
ever listed that law
and you wouldn't have ever mentioned
manifolds
and four-dimensional or anything like
that well you'd have some significant
explaining to do wouldn't you
it well if you wanted explanations you'd
have a lot of explaining to do you would
in fact have all the explaining
to do at the end of that huge process
that you had at the beginning
you wouldn't have explained anything we
were we were just talking about how um
the nature of
physical laws and whether or not and to
what extent they might be
pure abstractions or a kind of
abstraction of some kind and i was just
thinking to myself that for anyone who
denies
the existence of
physical laws in their own right laws of
physics
and to just say well there are just
facts of matter about the universe for
example
the orbits of
planets going around stars are
approximately circular or elliptical
then those facts of the matter those
regularities in nature seem to be crying
out for
an explanation so to deny that there
would be really existing physical laws
behind those regularities of nature
seems to me to be going to a lot of work
to
avoid what might otherwise be called
occam's razor well isn't the simple
explanation there are physical laws out
there governing these things
yes
of course if somebody insists on the
non-existence of explanations
like exactly like insistence on the
non-existence of anything
you can't be proved wrong
but i i think the the
motivation for denying the existence of
laws
is
the old mistake of empiricism
it is the assumption
that raw facts
or raw
sensory impressions uh have a privileged
status in that in that we can access
them directly and this is this people
contrast this with things like laws
and explanations in general
which they say we can't access directly
so so they are they have some kind of a
lesser reality and we can
in principle
not insist on their being real one can
insist on there not being real and it
doesn't make any difference the the
trouble with that is that exactly the
same is true of sense impressions as
well
and so this argument
that uh abstractions don't really exist
or that laws don't really exist and so
on
are hidden in there is the assumption
that sense impressions or that kind of
thing do really exist
in some sense of really which is itself
a mistake that
all
knowledge is conjectural all
observations are theory laden
there is nothing that is an
authoritative source of knowledge
everything is conjecture and so once
you've realized that everything is
conjecture but that knowledge can still
exist then the reason for making a
distinction between different kinds of
existence well no there is a distinction
between different kinds of existence but
the the justification the motivation
for denying that certain things exist
even if we need them in our explanations
uh goes away
and this once one it becomes at least
somewhat familiar with the
world view that you've presented in your
books and with papa's worldview it's
it's very difficult to try and reimagine
what people mean by
directly observe i i struggle now to try
and conceive of what one really means
when they say well there are certain
things you can just observe you can just
see but on explaining to them well let's
think about what that whole process of
seeing actually consists of of photons
you know being absorbed and then
re-emitted back towards the eye and then
being converted into electrical signals
which then go into your brain this this
whole concept of direct observation
actually itself vanishes into
a cloud of explanation not so much a
cloud but a a kind of
way of understanding the world that
denies the possibility of direct
observation i don't even know what
someone really
intends by this terminology this way of
denying the reality of things which we
don't have direct observat don't have
direct access to when we don't have
direct access to
anything even i would
tentatively argue that even the contents
of their own minds i agree uh in in a
way the contents of our own minds are
are
quite a highly sophisticated kind of
knowledge that we only know through
an extensive chain of interpretations
some of which are notoriously unreliable
um
uh you know even in everyday language we
we we know what we mean when we say
you're just fooling yourself
or
the content of those
ideas
is incompatible with
empiricism with the idea that knowledge
reliable knowledge comes from the senses
and i think what people regard that as
just one of those things you know it's
it's it's one of the mysteries of nature
it's it's the problem with induction or
something like that and
you say it's hard to imagine
what people mean when they
when they talk about direct observation
it's interesting that that concept of
direct observation also had to be
invented at one time
and in fact it was quite a liberation
when it was first invented
like in various stages there was there
was
empiricism in in the john locke sense
is relatively recent but but the idea
that we can gain knowledge by looking at
the world which is false was these
concepts of knowledge and looking and
reliable and that kind of thing they're
not built into our genes
somebody invented those concepts and at
the time when they invented them they
were an improvement on this on something
that was more vague and more false than
that trust the authority or something
for example
yes but there was a time when you didn't
even have to say trust the authorities
trusting the authorities was just the
way that the world was and nobody
bothered to put that into words it was
that reminds me of the divine right of
kings which is a concept that was
invented only after the authority of
kings was questioned
yes well this all raises the fact that
there is this creativity going on this
creation of
concepts in order to try and come to
better understand the world
that is the uniquely creative capacity
of the human mind and mind itself how do
you understand the nature of mind i
sometimes think of it as this
abstraction i think you've said this to
me it's a it's a it's a it's a funny
kind of abstraction it's an abstraction
that itself needs to be instantiated in
matter but also needs to be running it
can't just be like any other piece of
knowledge which you can
transmit from one place to another in
different physical forms and that's one
way of understanding what knowledge is
it allows itself to continue to persist
over time and to get itself copied to
get itself replicated but our mind a
human mind this thing that is enabling
the creation of this knowledge it itself
is
an unusual kind of abstraction how do
you think of it at the moment yes so
it's an unusual kind of of knowledge so
we have yet another classification a
mind is a kind of a kind of knowledge
you might say but it's a kind of
knowledge that doesn't only have to be
instantiated but as you have just said
it has to be running now what does that
mean
running how fast
running in what because uh
running in the wrong kind of computer
would
make it gibberish
or in a kind of computer that has the
wrong mapping to to reality we don't
know how it works we don't know how the
mind so the mind is characterized by
creativity i think we can go that far at
least the human mind is characterized by
creativity but we don't know what
creativity is we don't know what the
distinction is between a computer
program that is running creatively and
one that is not running creatively uh
one day we will know but we don't know
yet i think also there are and again
minds that minds exist is common sense
even though we don't know how they work
or what specifically they are
so more recent ideas that maybe minds
don't exist
that had to be invented too
it is not at all common sense and it
doesn't at all follow from any good
philosophy but we don't know
and uh
one of the things i think that that is a
misconception that dates from a very
long time ago is is that a mind is like
mostly consistent
that it consists of
the ideas in the mind
are
mostly consistent and when they're
inconsistent that's a kind of emergency
and
and we have to fix that because we have
because that does that that means that
it's not a proper mind really
it's it's uh contains inconsistencies
rather and that therefore that's no
different from
a a load of propositions written down on
a piece of paper i don't think that's
true at all i i think
a better way to think of the mind is as
a set of problems and a problem consists
of conflicting theories
so uh or rather a problem is is more
like some conflicting theories that we
have noticed because we don't
really think of something as a problem
unless it's giving rise to some thought
so
uh but but there must be ideas that are
conflicting with each other before we
have noticed it and so the mind i think
of it as sort of massive tangled ideas
which are largely inconsistent the parts
of it which we have sorted out into a
kind of consistency are a minority
that are currently not uh giving rise to
any thought they they might be invoked
in some
thought that's about some other
inconsistency
but the the part of the mind that is
thinking is full of inconsistency and so
therefore a model of the mind that
thinks of the mind as a set of
consistent propositions with occasional
inconsistencies that we then fix it is
uh i i i think very far from the truth
it's it's not a set of consistent ideas
and it's not a set of propositions
because propositions have a definite
truth value they each proposition is
either true or false and it has a
perfectly definite meaning if it has a
meaning whereas the ideas in minds don't
have a definite meaning and they're not
precisely true or false
we can make them have as sharp a meaning
as our current problem situation
requires that's what we should be aiming
for and we can make them as consistent
as the current problem situation
requires
and we're striving you talked earlier
about about
truth we're striving to make them as
true as the current problem situation
requires yes so it sounds that
whatever the nature of the mind is in a
computational sense has to be
radically different to any other kind of
program that we've hitherto encountered
because all those other programs are
written in such a way that it's
proposition after proposition perhaps
one following from another it's an
algorithm of a kind and these statements
need to be
consistent or the computer program
itself isn't going to run but you're
saying that
it's possibly the case that
underlying this uniquely creative
capacity of the human mind is something
that is quite the mirror image of that
in in at least some respects and maybe
this is this is what is needed in order
to
go some way to explaining what's going
on here with um
creativity or another way uh that you've
put that in the beginning of infinity is
of course
explanatory universality this idea that
even if there were other kinds of
creativity prior to us what we have
is a kind of creativity which allows us
to create knowledge which is going to be
able to solve problems in principle
about anything that exists in the
physical universe which brings me to one
of my little hobby horses which is this
uh concept that people sometimes raise
that well there might be snailians out
there the super advanced aliens who are
going to have some successor to the
successor to the successor of the
unification of quantum theory and
general relativity and even if they
could bring it to us we wouldn't
understand it it would be written in a
mathematics that's too complicated for
us or
consist of concepts that are beyond our
puny human minds to understand either
that or you know the super intelligence
is going to come along at some point in
the future and it too is going to
recognize that it's so much smarter than
us and uh we probably all deserve to be
exterminated something like that um
what's wrong with these i think
quite commonly held views about other
kinds of minds super advanced alien
minds or super intelligent artificial
intelligences again of course we can't
prove that such things don't exist uh
there's there's a very famous one called
god
which there have been disputes about um
uh
for many centuries they have
um
yes i i mean uh
even the bible speaks of unbelievers so
they they must have existed right yes
and to be a believer
in
that kind of entity
means that you're you're believing in an
entity whose mind whose mental processes
are
uh first of all not embedded in physics
not instantiated in physics in in the
same way that ours are
and also that they can reach further
they can understand things
that things embedded in mere physics can
never understand and you can't prove
that's false but it is a bad explanation
as i as i point out in the beginning of
infinity and so
one thing is that that there are many
such theories and there are there are
many theories about such entities
whether they be aliens or
gods or devils or demons or
artificial general intelligences those
theories since they're bad explanations
they have the property that uh if two
peop such believers in different ones
come to persuade me
of their view then
there's nothing i can do to choose
between them it's it's uh like they are
invoking some non-understandable thing
and the two of them are invoking some
two non-understandable things with a
non-understandable difference between
them
so uh i would like to you know put both
those people into a sack and tie it shut
and then only have to debate with the
survivor
for efficiency
very good
so that that that's related to this idea
that again problems are soluble and what
i would suggest is that a kind of a
special case of that almost is that the
all evils are due to lack of knowledge
principle of optimism that you have but
here it's really interesting the
principle of optimism this claim that
all evils are due to a lack of knowledge
seems to be linking quite strongly
epistemology stuff about knowledge to
evil stuff about morality isn't that a
big leap surely people who
do evil things are doing evil things
because of their ideas which is to say
what they know it's not a lack of
knowledge is it it's it's a it is the
presence of some knowledge oh well
that's the same thing uh they they
they are doing it because their
knowledge is inadequate is false
in in some relevant way
and even the the good guys their
knowledge is
better than the bad guys but it's still
not true it's not perfect it can be
improved the in fact the good guys are
characterized to a large extent by the
fact that they are open to correcting
their existing knowledge
and to adopting better ideas that they
previously didn't know yes i think it
it's the it's the natural thing it
should be one's first guess that
moral knowledge is included in in the
same epistemology as physical or
mathematical knowledge because as i've
said the arguments that there are
different kinds of knowledge depending
on some kind of privilege access to one
or the other
is just a mistake it's it's uh you know
empiricism or something of the kind that
that is is just a
not understanding the conjectural nature
of all ideas
yes and that include must include moral
ones and mathematical ones and physical
ones and and so on and
uniformly the way to get better ideas is
to try to get better explanations in the
light of the problems that one has with
those ideas
there might be
i think there's even another way that uh
the beginning of infinity does uh create
a strong link in one's mind between
epistemology and morality and that would
be in the moral injunction do not
destroy the means of error correction so
there we have you know error correction
that's epistemology and do not do this
thing okay so there's a moral claim now
i wanted to focus on this for a minute
because this might raise an issue within
constructor theory and that this is your
new physics along with your new theory
of physics along with chiara maletto
about the physics of the possible and
the impossible or the possible and
impossible transformations i think is
one way it might be described and among
many things to be excited about with
this approach is the link
it seems to me between physics and
epistemology and we already know
some of this story we we know that what
can be proven in mathematics depends on
what we know about what the laws of
physics are and how the laws of physics
operate and because we know that proofs
in mathematics are a kind of computation
computation requires a computer the
computer has to be made out of something
made out of matter the matter obeys laws
of physics so we can only prove things
that the laws of physics say it is
possible to prove but constructive
theory seems to be generalizing this
further i'm not sure if that'd be fair
to say so we're going beyond mathematics
now and perhaps into realms where we are
saying look some things are not possible
to know and some things are possible to
know even outside of mathematics but
there may be things impossible to know
in history for example or in science
because there'll be no transformation
allowing us to actually construct the
knowledge that solves the problem there
but this if i've just gone way off the
rails in my reasoning here would seem to
contradict the problems a soluble claim
in the beginning infinity though the one
example i i want to call on i think you
might have mentioned this in the fabric
of reality i can't remember but it's
something to the effect of let's say you
wanted to know what augustus caesar ate
on his 13th birthday that's a reasonable
scientific question but it might also be
unknowable but it's not going to be a
problem for our understanding because
it's going to be inherently
uninteresting it's not going to solve
any actual historical problems but is
this way of thinking about how
constructive theory comes to bear on
morality and epistemology at all valid i
think that
one can address that issue
without using constructor theory
directly if constructed theory works
then there will be a theory of knowledge
within constructor theory just like
there will be a theory of quantum
mechanics within constructor theory
we don't know how these uh
subsidiary theories whether these
subsidiary theories will be changed or
if they have to be changed to what
extent they have to be
our theory of knowledge is nowhere near
as as precise and accurate as our
theories about physics i i don't quite
understand your question because
suppose we had a problem about
caesar's what caesar ate on his 13th
birthday i i think the example i usually
use is julius caesar's last meal ah yes
yes never mind i mean augustus sees his
13th birthday meal is just as good
um if some problem depended on knowing
that as a
as a solution then it it's not accurate
to
cast this this problem in terms of
having to have evidence of what it was
you know this is this is not necessarily
a question of which observables
can be observed in physics we know that
most of the observables
the detailed observables of the past are
have been randomized to such an extent
that it would require an infeasible
amount of collection of knowledge an
infeasible amount of measurement shall
we say
to to reconstitute
and that might well be true i mean if it
isn't true of
of these caesar uh meal events it'll be
true of some lots of events it'll be
true of most events at the time so
assume that that uh
it is infeasible because of the laws of
physics
and this could be expressed precisely in
constructive theory to measure
julius caesar's last meal that doesn't
mean that we can't solve the problem
that gave rise to this question because
it can't be a question about physics
from from the point of view of physics
this is a very uninteresting question um
so it would be a a thing it would be a
question about history or about
sociology yes or about you know some
subject that hasn't been invented yet in
which there would be explanations that
rival explanations both of which had
reasonable arguments in their favor and
which somebody decided could be resolved
by making this measurement and then it
turns out this measurement is impossible
well that doesn't mean that it can't be
resolved in other ways
yes i mean we we know
that that last meal
was not a cheeseburger
and that is not because we have
measurements to that effect
it's because we have high level theories
about the development of human culture
and uh the problem about what he ate etc
would have come
out of that kind of
field
yes precisely
may well come out of that kind of field
as well
yeah i can only imagine that the
question would arise if there was
a problem about how and why he died so
if it was julius caesar and there was
some concern that maybe he'd been
poisoned just before he died well then
there would presumably be
theories about you know
existing historical documents about how
various other people uh living with him
at the time didn't particularly like him
and then presumably although we might
not be able to tell what his final meal
was some uh very smart forensic
scientist might be able to detect some
kind of toxin in where his stomach used
to be so i imagine that even a problem
like this it wouldn't be
framed in exactly
those words what was his last meal but
it might be um you know some some other
kind of historical questions
it would arise out of some problem that
wasn't a physics problem for sure
yes uh and by the way there is this
problem with napoleon you know did he
die of
wallpaper right um
uh because you know it's it's
controversial how napoleon died uh he
wasn't that old uh
and uh he had some symptoms
uh which are consistent with arsenic
poisoning and
there were people who who would would
have preferred to see him dead and then
other people have said well yes it was
arsenic poisoning but it was
because of the wallpaper uh the the
color of the wallpaper was was caused by
arsenic paint um and other people who
said uh yes so there was arsenic in the
wallpaper but not enough to kill him
and so on and so on and this problem is
eminently addressable not by
going and finding video evidence of the
poisoner okay so uh following papa and
like myself and others in that tradition
we don't place any real currency on the
source of an idea because any idea can
be evaluated utterly independent of its
source or its author and i can take all
that on board i think you go even
further in this that you're not even
interested much in the origin of ideas
or the history of ideas and uh this is
actually encapsulated in what uh naval
has been pains to point out in his
podcast with me anyway that he's not
much interested in names who said what
and so on it's basically about the ideas
and i think that's quite right
nevertheless um personally and i guess
there's a point of indulgence more than
anything else i am interested in the
history of ideas to some extent so you
know i like to know the fact that
einstein really was the prime originator
of general relativity but it's
interesting to know that marcel grausman
for example helped him and you know i
think one or more of his wives might
have helped him as well with the
mathematics on general relativity um so
it's it's interesting historically about
how these great theories kind of came to
us what the lineage is now that brings
me to this question about quantum
computation i'm interested in this
because you were inspired obviously by
turing and your paper as of i think it
was last week anyway it's now been cited
6122 times which is no small feat that
that paper being titled quantum theory
the church turing principle in the
universal quantum computer
what i wanted to ask you about that is
as you wrote it because i think when
turing wrote his paper on the turing
machine he was thinking well it's an
abstract mathematical object this isn't
going to have much i don't know did did
he think it was going to have much in
the way of a huge
industry of engineering these things was
going to follow i don't know if that was
in his mind but did you have any sense
in writing the paper about quantum
computation that it would have spawned
an industry a multi-billion dollar at
the moment industry of racing to build
these things did that enter your mind at
the time no
um i i i i was entirely
concerned
with the laws of physics
and
that this was a
hitherto unsuspected facet of quantum
theory that it had this intimate
relationship with computation so i i i
had in the back of my mind that maybe
this could be built a quantum computer
could be built for the purpose of
demonstrating or testing properties of
the laws of physics of quantum theory
but i i wasn't concerned with
with practical uses of it at all and not
even other laboratory uses of it and by
the way i think
i i'm not a so i'm not a historian of
science i don't know
much about the history of ideas in
general yes um
only certain very narrow facets i i but
i think that history in general is an
extremely important worthwhile subject
and the history of ideas in particular
is is i think the most important aspect
of history it's just that i happen you
know to
to have have studied other things
mostly um but i think
that turing was also not interested at
the time when he wrote that paper
in
making anything
useful
babbage interestingly was yes and the uh
for him
the
again i i'm i'm going by
tv documentaries rather than any real
research of my own but it seems that
that he was
initially concerned with a very
practical
application of computers namely the
autumn automation of the printing of
mathematical tables which uh had to do
with navigation and and so on and that
he he even when he conceived of the
universal version of this machine which
was then called the analytical engine he
still wasn't
then what he saw was this this was a
universal machine for arithmetic and for
algebra but or not even for algebra i'm
not sure for for arithmetic at least and
it was
lovelace who saw that that this machine
would be universal in the sense that we
mean today
yes yes
and so that then that leads me to the
question that i don't i don't want it to
be too uncomfortable but there is this
question about
was it church was it turing and now of
course you bring in babbage as well and
lovelace you says were the first to
figure out that these machines could be
universal well to what extent do you
think feynman understood the
universality of
quantum computation did he have a
conception of it at all around the time
when you were writing this paper or was
it only in light of you telling him
about the proof that he then sort of um
uh got what you were going on about i
don't know i only met him once
and we had a long conversation only part
of which was about quantum computation
and and i was not at all focused on
um
finding out what he knows right okay yes
uh so i i don't know but i know that in
in his published work there is no real
hint of the thing that is now called a
universal quantum computer or actually
it's now more often called the universal
quantum turing machine which is a very
bad bad terminology um but there's uh
although he again he was aware that
quantum computation could be more
powerful than classical computation
and he was aware of a certain level of
universality
um but his idea for how to
how to
make one of these
was itself
to put on some kind of circuit board
a quantum system that had specially
tuned hamiltonians
whereas the in the real quantum computer
um the special tuning is itself a
quantum program it's uh there's a single
machine you don't have to change the
hardware to make to make to to compute a
new quantum computation there is a
single machine that can be programmed
to enact any quantum computation and i i
don't think in i don't think there's any
hint of that in feynman's published work
although
the speed with which he cottoned on to
uh the algorithm that i explained to him
suggests that he he
was on the verge of that either before i
spoke to him or just after
okay two uh final just purely for fun
questions
but yes but as you said who cares
this is this is true this is true except
for historians of science i'm sure in in
the uh the years and decades to come
this will be a a certainly a point of
interest
in in future they'll analyze the
wallpaper and find out things
yes
okay this question is just purely for
fun um do you have any opinion on tic
tacs that's a big thing going on at the
moment and do you know what i'm talking
about no i don't know what it is oh okay
so this is the
the american military specifically i
think the navy who've released these
videos of what they say are unidentified
objects of some kind and i know this is
ridiculous they say things like they're
violating laws of physics or at least
they are
evidence of technology which is not
explicable given the current state of
technology you haven't heard about these
things seen anything about these things
nor have any opinion on these things
well now that you mention it i've seen
things on twitter
which are now explicable in the light of
uh
is it the the american military or
something having having said something
about ufos is that yes
i see okay well um
the opportunities for error
are
enormous
and
to perform a scientific experiment that
is is a crucial test
of
sophisticated scientific theories
is very very difficult and and
universally almost universally
underestimated it's sort of taken for
granted that that einstein did a very
difficult thing but it's not so much
understood that stern and gerlach who
who
uh did experiments on quantum
superpositions of particles in different
positions but they did an amazing thing
as well
yes good experiments are
rare and
they require usually a great deal of
skill and creativity and it's not the
kind of thing that
military pilots
or policemen
are
typically
cognizant of
yes so
uh i think when people like that
report a thing that quote violates the
laws of physics
i i would
consider it unreasonable
to go for
any explanation of that other than human
error yes yes and of course when you do
look at the the footage there is no
apparent violation laws of physics even
if you grant that this thing is uh
moving at a high velocity beyond
anything that we might be capable of
that's still
sub light speed so it hasn't violated
relativity on the one hand and by the
way even if you don't have an answer for
what's going on there well that's kind
of where you might have to stop you
don't immediately leap to its uh
aliens from the other side of the galaxy
my last question is from my father and
i'll just ask you this before i go it's
about dark energy and
we know the universe is accelerating in
its expansion
it's behaving as if
there is negative pressure on the
outside of the observable universe
isn't this evidence that the observable
universe is actually
inside of a much larger region
itself
of lower density but magnificently
greater size perhaps infinite in size
and perhaps it's actually got zero
density perhaps this void beyond our
universe is the thing into which the
universe is necessarily expanding
because we've got positive pressure
inside of our universe and outside of
that outside of our universe that's
negative pressure could this be a
solution
so
first of all dark energy is just the
name given to this anomalous expansion
which we haven't explained yes so i
think the reason that dark energy was
chosen as a name is because of dark
matter
where the the
all reasonable theories of it so far
have postulated that it's a kind of
matter and it's dark because because it
doesn't interact with with photons and
so on
with dark energy we don't have such a
thing we we don't know that there is a
source of pressure or that these
observations
are caused by something pushing on the
universe and so on but
where's the prevailing theories of what
dark energy does
nevermind what it is but what it does
the universe is not expanding into
anything
the universe is
is uh the length scales in the universe
are increasing intrinsically and this is
the same uh the same as was
the case with the with the prevailing
theories before
uh dark energy that the universe
initially had uh well at any rate very
near to the big bang it was very small
there was a time when it was only the
size of an atom there was a time when it
was only the size of a neutron and so on
and at that time and now it's much
bigger the difference between then and
now is not that it has expanded to fill
a void it has just expanded
intrinsically yes
and some of the present theories say
that it is in fact infinitely large and
that it is infinite infinitely large and
homogeneous so that the the total amount
of matter in it is infinite uh i don't
think that there are any theories
i mean one could easily write down a
theory
in which the universe was inhomogeneous
and we are in the only
place in it that has matter right yes
that wouldn't help in any way with any
of the existing theories and more
generally by the way
theories of inhomogeneity
in the universe
as far as i know i'm not an expert on
this but i i think they've only been
invoked by people who want to say that
there is no dark energy that it's just a
coincidence caused by in homogeneities
excellent okay i think that absolutely
answers the question i think that will
do for now but i hope not for the last
time i make my way through the fabric of
reality after all now at the moment so
perhaps at the end of that we can speak
again if not um sooner
so thank you very much for
writing the books i think they've been
uh well the explanations that transform
the world i think they've been life
transforming for many people so um it's
been wonderful to talk to you very
gratifying today to have this
conversation so um have a wonderful
reminder of the day
yourself uh same to you it's always fun
chatting
so there we go i hope you enjoyed that i
certainly did as i say i'm working on
what might be called interview technique
it's a steep learning curve the content
of deutsche and popper's uvoir is deep
and subtle enough but adding to that how
to run a podcast and being surrounded by
new upgraded podcast hardware and
software that i'm struggling to learn to
use is a whole other thing but hopefully
will improve rapidly over the coming
weeks and months if you're a new
listener i'd encourage you to go out and
to listen to all of the david deutsch
content that is out there his ted talks
and other interviews of course buy his
books subscribe to my podcast here
wherever you're listening there is a
youtube version as i say if you are on
audio only which sometimes has those
pretty visuals subscribe to the naval
podcast where we are exploring all the
major themes in the fabric of reality
and the beginning of infinity and naval
is broadening all that content out into
the realms of wealth wisdom and life and
finally if you're so inclined go to
www.bretthall.org
and follow the links there to support
this podcast there are lots of great
podcasts out there all about science and
philosophy and even thinking but i think
here we have a small community uniquely
devoted to a particularly special kind
of clear thinking about life informed by
the best that science and philosophy can
teach us we'd like to grow so the ideas
can reach into places where the errors
need correcting so i'll keep doing my
bit until next time let me steal a line
from naval and say stay optimistic
bye-bye
[Applause]
[Music]
so
did
[Music]
two
[Applause]
[Music]
you